2021-08-31

Hello again, Qubes community!

I hope you've all been well. As many of you know, I've continued to sign
Qubes canaries [1] ever since I left the project [2]. At the time, I
thought I could just continue to sign them forever, but I didn't
consider that this would effectively make my secure Qubes laptop like a
ball-and-chain that I'd have to bring with me wherever I go. :)

At this point in my life, I'd really like to do much more traveling
while being able to pack light and feel free of too many physical
possessions. Since I am not willing to compromise the security of the
Qubes OS Project or the security of the Qubes laptop I've been using to
sign canaries in any way just to make my own personal life easier, I've
decided it would be best to request that I be removed from the list of
canary signers. Otherwise, there would be canaries that I wouldn't be
able to sign on-time, which would create headaches for Marek and Simon,
as well as confusion for users looking for my signature and not finding
it.

So, I've requested that the current Qubes security team remove me from
the Qubes canary signing process. And, FWIW, I confirm that I --
according to the best of my knowledge -- destroyed all copies of the
Qubes Master Signing Key which were in my possession when I passed
project lead to Marek, and no one has approached me in an attempt to
subvert the Qubes OS Project in any way. This request is solely for my
own personal reasons, as explained above.

Canary 028 [3] should contain a description of this event under the
"Special announcements" section, and that canary should be accompanied
by my signature as well as those of the current Qubes security team,
Marek Marczykowski-GÃ³recki and Simon Gaiser. Canary 028 is the final
canary I will sign.

I wish the Qubes OS Project continued success!

Sincerely,
Joanna

[1] https://www.qubes-os.org/security/canary/
[2] https://www.qubes-os.org/news/2018/10/25/the-next-chapter/
[3] https://github.com/QubesOS/qubes-secpack/blob/master/canaries/canary-028-2021.txt
