
                    ---===[ Qubes Canary 028 ]===---


Statements
-----------

The Qubes core developers who have digitally signed this file [1] state
the following:

1. The date of issue of this canary is August 31, 2021.

2. There have been TODO Qubes security bulletins published so far.

3. The Qubes Master Signing Key fingerprint is:

       427F 11FD 0FAA 4B08 0123  F01C DDFA 1A3E 3687 9494

4. No warrants have ever been served to us with regard to the Qubes OS
   Project (e.g. to hand out the private signing keys or to introduce
   backdoors).

5. We plan to publish the next of these canary statements in the first
   fourteen days of November 2021. Special note should be taken if no
   new canary is published by that time or if the list of statements
   changes without plausible explanation.

Special announcements
----------------------

Joanna Rutkowska will soon begin traveling without her Qubes laptop for
extended periods of time, which means she will not be able to sign
future canaries on time. She has asked the members of the Qubes security
team, Marek Marczykowski-GÃ³recki and Simon Gaiser, to be released of her
obligation to sign canaries, and she has reaffirmed that she destroyed
all copies of the Qubes Master Signing Key in her possession when she
transferred the project lead position to Marek. The Qubes security team
has agreed to her request. Therefore, this will be the last Qubes canary
signed by Joanna.

Note that this canary is being published one day ahead of schedule
because this is the last day Joanna is available to sign. In addition to
the usual detached signatures from all three aforementioned individuals,
this canary is also accompanied by letters (with their own detached
signatures), all of which can be found in the canary directory in the
qubes-secpack [3].

Disclaimers and notes
----------------------

We would like to remind you that Qubes OS has been designed under the
assumption that all relevant infrastructure is permanently compromised.
This means that we assume NO trust in any of the servers or services
which host or provide any Qubes-related data, in particular, software
updates, source code repositories, and Qubes ISO downloads.

This canary scheme is not infallible. Although signing the declaration
makes it very difficult for a third party to produce arbitrary
declarations, it does not prevent them from using force or other means,
like blackmail or compromising the signers' laptops, to coerce us to
produce false declarations.

The proof of freshness provided below serves to demonstrate that this
canary could not have been created prior to the date stated. It shows
that a series of canaries was not created in advance.

This declaration is merely a best effort and is provided without any
guarantee or warranty. It is not legally binding in any way to anybody.
None of the signers should be ever held legally responsible for any of
the statements made here.

Proof of freshness
-------------------

TODO

Footnotes
----------

[1] This file should be signed in two ways: (1) via detached PGP
signatures by each of the signers, distributed together with this canary
in the qubes-secpack.git repo, and (2) via digital signatures on the
corresponding qubes-secpack.git repo tags. [2]

[2] Don't just trust the contents of this file blindly! Verify the
digital signatures!

[3] https://github.com/QubesOS/qubes-secpack/tree/master/canaries
